Ref/docs (#450)
edgelesssys/marblerun: docs/docs/architecture/security.md

Reviewer: Please fix the Vale errors in this file. I'll review it afterward.

# Key management and cryptographic primitives

MarbleRun protects and isolates your deployments and workloads. To that end, cryptography is the foundation that ensures the confidentiality and integrity of all components.
Evaluating the security and compliance of MarbleRun requires a precise understanding of the cryptographic primitives and keys used.
The following gives an overview of the architecture and explains the technical details.

## High-level architecture

The [Coordinator](coordinator.md) and the [Marbles](marbles.md) run inside SGX Enclaves. See [Intel's documentation](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/software-guard-extensions/overview.html) on the architecture details and cryptographic primitives of SGX.

MarbleRun uses cryptography for the following tasks.

* Authentication and authorization

> * Establishing a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Establishing a public key infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun
```

* Encrypting network traffic via mutual TLS between enclaves
* Encrypting persistent state

The following graphic gives an overview of the architecture and the components.

![Security architecture](../_media/security_architecture.svg)

## Authentication and authorization

> MarbleRun uses the SGX remote attestation capability to authenticate the Coordinator and the Marble enclaves. See the section on [attestation](../features/attestation.md) for more information on this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MarbleRun uses the SGX [remote attestation](../features/attestation.md) capability to authenticate the Coordinator and the Marble enclaves.
```

For authorization, the [manifest](../features/manifest.md) defines the Marble's access to secrets and keys after successful attestation.
Furthermore, MarbleRun's' [RBAC](../workflows/define-manifest.md#roles) attaches [users'](../workflows/define-manifest.md#users) identities to roles in the manifest.
Each role is associated with a set of operations the user can perform in the deployment.
Users are authenticated by the Coordinator using an RSA or ECDSA public key defined in the manifest.

> ## Public Key Infrastructure and Certificate Authority
> 
> The Coordinator establishes a public key infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun and acts as the Certificate Authority (CA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Public key infrastructure and certificate authority

The Coordinator establishes a public key infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun and acts as the certificate authority (CA).
```

The goal of the PKI is to make authentication of confidential applications based on remote attestation accessible and usable.
The Coordinator provides an [API](../reference/coordinator.md) for retrieving an SGX attestation statement that embeds its *Root CA Certificate* in the user-defined body.
By verifying the statement, clients can verify the certificate's authenticity and, thereby, the MarbleRun CA.
See the [attested TLS](#attested-tls-atls) section for details behind that concept.
All MarbleRun clients and Marbles can then use the attested *Root CA Certificate* for authenticating TLS connections.

> This is further illustrated conceptionally in the [attestation](../features/attestation.md) section. The following focuses on the cryptographic primitives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is further illustrated conceptually in the [attestation](../features/attestation.md) section. The following focuses on the cryptographic primitives.
```

> The Coordinator generates a root x509 certificate and corresponding asymmetric key pair during initialization.
> The [Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf#page=49) is used with curve [P256](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-4.pdf#page=111).
> The *Root CA Certificate* has no expiry date and lives as long as the MarbleRun deployment.
> 
> Alongside the *Root CA Certificate*, the Coordinator generates an x509 *Intermediate Certificate* and corresponding asymmetric key pair, again using ECDSA with P256.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Coordinator generates a root X.509 certificate and corresponding asymmetric key pair during initialization.
The [Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf#page=49) is used with curve [P256](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-4.pdf#page=111).
The *Root CA Certificate* has no expiry date and lives as long as the MarbleRun deployment.

Alongside the *Root CA Certificate*, the Coordinator generates an X.509 *Intermediate Certificate* and corresponding asymmetric key pair, again using ECDSA with P256.
```

The *Intermediate Certificate* is signed by the Coordinator's *Root CA Certificate* and rotated with every manifest update.
When you push an update to the manifest (for example, bump up the *SecurityVersion* of a Mable), the *Intermediate Certificate* will change.
Instances with the new version won't authenticate with instances of the old version and vice versa.
Hence, no data flow is happening between different *SecurityVersions* of your application.
However, the *Root CA Certificate* doesn't change. So you can still verify the Coordinator and your application from the outside and ensure it's the same instance you might have interacted with.

> Applications interacting with the MarbleRun deployment can decide whether to use the intermediate or the root certificate as CA, depending on whether they want to notice and explicitly handle manifest updates.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if the average user gets the implications of this approach. Should we describe it more explicit? Like

```suggestion
Applications interacting with the MarbleRun deployment should use the intermediate certificate as CA to make manifest updates observable:
if the manifest changes, connections to the deployment will fail.
The application owner can then review the changes and install the new intermediate certificate to approve them.
If such observability isn't required, the application can use the root certificate as CA.
In that case, the application will continue to work even if the manifest changes.
```

The "outside world" sees an intermediate certificate signed by the Coordinator's *Root CA Certificate*.
The Coordinator generates a unique leaf *Marble Certificate* and corresponding key pair using ECDSA with P256 for every Marble.
The *Marble Root Certificate* signs the *Marble Certificate*.
The *Marble Certificate* is provisioned to the Marble's enclave via the secure channel established during the [attestation procedure](../features/attestation.md).
Depending on the Marble's runtime, the certificate can be used [manually](../workflows/add-service.md#make-your-service-use-the-provided-tls-credentials) or [automatically](../features/transparent-TLS.md) to establish mutually authenticated TLS connections.

![PKI Certificate chain](../_media/cert-chain.svg)

## Attested TLS (aTLS)

In a CC environment, attested TLS (aTLS) can establish secure connections between two parties using the remote attestation features of the CC components.
aTLS modifies the TLS handshake by embedding an attestation statement into the TLS certificate. Instead of relying on a certificate authority, aTLS uses this attestation statement to establish trust in the certificate.

> The protocol can be used by clients to verify a server certificate, by a server to verify a client certificate, or for mutual verification (mutual aTLS).

Reviewer: this section also needs to be adapted

## Encryption of state

> The Coordinator holds the MarbleRuns state, which consists of the [manifest](../features/manifest.md), the [managed secrets](../features/secrets-management.md), and the [certificates for its CA](../features/attestation.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Coordinator holds MarbleRun's state, which consists of the [manifest](../features/manifest.md), the [managed secrets](../features/secrets-management.md), and the [certificates for its CA](../features/attestation.md).
```

The state is stored encrypted in persistent storage. Therefore Constellation uses [AES128-GCM](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5116#section-5.1) and a generated 16-byte Data Encryption Key (KEK) to seal the state to persistent storage.
The DEK is also sealed to persistent storage to recover the state in case of a restart autonomously.
[SGX sealing](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/introduction-to-intel-sgx-sealing.html) is used for that purpose.
The Coordinator encrypts the DEK with a key encryption key (KEK).
The KEK MarbleRun uses the SGX sealing key called `Product key`, which is bound to its `Product ID` and the enclave's author `MRSIGNER` identity.
In other words, a fresh and benign enclave instance of the same identity can recover that key.

> Hence, as long as the Coordinator is restarted on the same CPU, it can obtain the same KEK from the CPU based on its identity, decrypt the DEK and recover its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, if the Coordinator is restarted on the same CPU, it can obtain the same KEK from the CPU, decrypt the DEK, and recover its state.
```
suggest shortening this

See the [attested TLS](#attested-tls-atls) section for details behind that concept.
All MarbleRun clients and Marbles can then use the attested *Root CA Certificate* for authenticating TLS connections.
This is further illustrated conceptually in the [attestation](../features/attestation.md) section. The following focuses on the cryptographic primitives.
The Coordinator generates a root X.509 certificate and corresponding asymmetric key pair during initialization.
The [Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)](https://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf#page=49) is used with curve [P256](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-4.pdf#page=111).
The *Root CA Certificate* has no expiry date and lives as long as the MarbleRun deployment.

Alongside the *Root CA Certificate*, the Coordinator generates an X.509 *Intermediate Certificate* and corresponding asymmetric key pair, again using ECDSA with P256.
The *Intermediate Certificate* is signed by the Coordinator's *Root CA Certificate* and rotated with every manifest update.
When you push an update to the manifest (for example, bump up the *SecurityVersion* of a Marble), the *Intermediate Certificate* will change.

> Marbles instances of the new version won't authenticate with instances of the old version and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Marble instances of the new version won't authenticate with instances of the old version and vice versa.
```

The goal here is to implement a  [cross-signed certificate chain](https://www.ssltrust.com.au/blog/understanding-certificate-cross-signing).
In that way, the Marbles see the *Marble Root Certificate* as a self-signed root certificate. Hence, they're dealing with a terminating certificate chain without knowing about the Coordinator's *Root CA Certificate*.
The "outside world" sees an intermediate certificate signed by the Coordinator's *Root CA Certificate*.
The Coordinator generates a unique leaf *Marble Certificate* and corresponding key pair using ECDSA with P256 for every Marble.
The *Marble Root Certificate* signs the *Marble Certificate*.
The *Marble Certificate* is provisioned to the Marble's enclave via the secure channel established during the [attestation procedure](../features/attestation.md).
Depending on the Marble's runtime, the certificate can be used [manually](../workflows/add-service.md#make-your-service-use-the-provided-tls-credentials) or [automatically](../features/transparent-TLS.md) to establish mutually authenticated TLS connections.

![PKI Certificate chain](../_media/cert-chain.svg)

## Attested TLS (aTLS)

> In a CC environment, attested TLS (aTLS) can establish secure connections between two parties using the remote attestation features of the CC components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a confidential computing (CC) environment, attested TLS (aTLS) can establish secure connections between two parties using the remote attestation features of the CC components.
```
first mention on this page

With aTLS, the party to be authenticated binds its TLS certificate to an attestation statement.

> For example, it embeds the certificate's public key into an attestation statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, it embeds the certificate's public key into the attestation statement.
```

Instead of relying on a certificate authority, aTLS uses this attestation statement to establish trust in the certificate.
The protocol can be used by clients to verify a server certificate, by a server to verify a client certificate, or for mutual verification (mutual aTLS).

## Encryption of state

The Coordinator holds MarbleRun's state, which consists of the [manifest](../features/manifest.md), the [managed secrets](../features/secrets-management.md), and the [certificates for its CA](../features/attestation.md).

> The state is stored encrypted in persistent storage. For this, MarbleRun uses [AES128-GCM](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5116#section-5.1) and a generated 16-byte Data Encryption Key (KEK) to seal the state to persistent storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state is stored encrypted in persistent storage. For this, MarbleRun uses [AES128-GCM](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5116#section-5.1) and a generated 16-byte data encryption key (DEK).
```

If the Coordinator is restarted on a different CPU, it won't be able to obtain the same SGX sealing key from the CPU.
Therefore, MarbleRun provides a [recovery feature](../features/recovery.md#recovery).
The manifest allows for specifying a designated Recovery Key. The Recovery Key is a public RSA key. Upon startup, the Coordinator encrypts the DEK with this public key and returns it to the user.
In case of a recovery event, the user decrypts the DEK locally and [uploads it to the Coordinator](../workflows/recover-coordinator.md).
The Coordinator will decrypt the state with the DEK and proceed with operations.

For [multi-party use cases](../features/recovery.md#multi-party-recovery), MarbleRun allows splitting the Recovery Key between parties.
Every recovery party is defined in the manifest with its own public RSA key.
The Coordinator generates a share of the recovery secret for every party and encrypts it with the corresponding RSA key.
During a recovery event, every party will upload their share of the secret, which are all XORed together by the Coordinator to receive the combined key for decrypting the DEK.

> ![Encrypted state single instance](../_media/enc-state-single.svg)

Reviewer: The graphic should either be moved two paragraphs above or also illustrate recovery.

![Security architecture](../_media/security_architecture.svg)

## Authentication and authorization

MarbleRun uses the SGX remote attestation capability to authenticate the Coordinator and the Marble enclaves. See our section on [attestation](../features/attestation.md) for more information on this process.
For authorization, the [manifest](../features/manifest.md) defines the Marble's access to secrets and keys after successful attestation.
Furthermore, MarbleRun's' [RBAC](../workflows/define-manifest.md#roles) attaches a Marble's identity to a role in the manifest.
Each role is associated with a set of operations that Marble can perform in the deployment.
Roles can also be attached to [users](../workflows/define-manifest.md#users), which are authenticated by the Coordinator using an RSA or ECDSA public key defined in the manifest.

## Public Key Infrastructure and Certificate Authority

The Coordinator establishes a public key infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun and acts as the Certificate Authority (CA).
The goal of the PKI is to make authentication of confidential applications based on remote attestation accessible and usable.

> The Coordinator embeds its attestation statement into its root CA certificate, see the [attested TLS](#attested-tls-atls) section for details behind that concept.

Author: Good point! I changed it to reflect what we're doing in MarbleRun.

The intermediate certificate is signed by the Coordinator's root certificate and rotated with every update of the manifest.
When you push an update to the manifest (for example bump up the *SecurityVersion* of a Mable) the intermediate certificate will change.
Instances with the new version will not authenticate with instances of the old version and vice versa.
Hence, no data flow is happening between different *SecurityVersions* of your application.
However, the root certificate doesn't change. So you can still verify the Coordinator and your application from the outside and make sure it is the same instance you might have interacted with before.

The Coordinator creates a second intermediate certificate that is called the *Marble root certificate*.
The Marble root certificate is self-signed using the intermediate certificate's private key implementing a  [cross-signed certificate chain](https://www.ssltrust.com.au/blog/understanding-certificate-cross-signing).
In that way, the Marbles see a self-signed root certificate, hence, the are dealing with a terminating certificate chain without knowing about the Coordinator's root certificate.

> The "outside world" sees an intermediate certificate signed by the Coordinator's root certificate and the corresponding root certificate.

Reviewer: This may be hard to comprehend. Not sure how to improve it without making it much more verbose, though.

Author: Tried to explain it a bit more verbose, not sure if that helps?

> Applications interacting with the MarbleRun deployment can decide wether to use the intermediate or the root certificate as CA depending on if they want to notice and handle manifest updates explicitely or not.

Reviewer: The last sentence seems to belong to the previous paragraph.

For every Marble the Coordinator generates a unique leaf "Marble" certificate and corresponding key pair using ECDSA with P256.
The Marble certificate is signed by the Marble root certificate.

> The Marble certificate is provisioned to the Marble's enclave via the secure channel established during the [attestation procedure](../features/attestation.md).

Reviewer: You may give a hint for what this is needed before it's fully explained later (if you can do it in a few words). Or you may remove the "mutual TLS auth" section and add its last sentence here.

## Encryption of state

The Coordinator holds the MarbleRuns state, which consists of the [manifest](../features/manifest.md), the [managed secrets](../features/secrets-management.md), and the [certificates for its CA](../features/attestation.md).
The state is stored encrypted in persistent storage. Therefore Constellation uses [AES128-GCM](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5116#section-5.1) and a randomly generated 16-byte Data Encryption Key (KEK) to seal the state to persistent storage.
The DEK is also sealed to persistent storage to recover the state in case of a restart autonomously.
[SGX's sealing feature](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/introduction-to-intel-sgx-sealing.html) is used for that purpose.
The Coordinator encrypts the DEK with a key encryption key (KEK).
The KEK MarbleRun uses the SGX sealing key called `Product key`, which is bound to its `Product ID` and the enclave's author `MRSIGNER` identity.
In other words, a fresh and benign enclave instance of the same identity can recover that key.

> Hence, as long as the Coordinator is restarted on the same CPU, it can obtain the same KEK from the CPU based on its identity, decrypt the DEK and recover its state.

Reviewer: consider adding manual recovery (and the involved RSA encryption) here

Author: Added

MarbleRun uses cryptography for the following tasks.

* Authentication and authorization

> * Establishing a public critical infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Establishing a public key infrastructure (PKI) for MarbleRun
```
"public key infrastructure" should be correct, no?

## Attested TLS (aTLS)

In a CC environment, attested TLS (aTLS) can establish secure connections between two parties using the remote attestation features of the CC components.

> With aTLS, the party to be authenticated somehow binds its TLS certificate to an attestation statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With aTLS, the party to be authenticated binds its TLS certificate to an attestation statement.
```
IMO, the sentence reads a bit better if we just remove the "somehow"
